docs: parallelism doc updates (#7457)
deephaven/deephaven-core: docs/python/getting-started/crash-course/parallelization.md

Reviewer: I think this document contains the content we need, but the language needs some work.  Some wording is unclear / imprecise / etc. Additionally, some concepts are terms are used as if the reader has a clue -- many won't.  There is also internal jargon mixed in that further muddies the waters.  If you don't totally understand the wording, a user won't either.

Reviewer: For reference, I used the following prompt with the raw doc file to look at these concepts:
```
Below is a documentation file. Make comments on where wording is unclear, imprecise, jargony, uses advanced terms without defining them, etc. The target reader is a Python developer that understands the basics.
```

**Response:** (partial)

<img width="896" height="1311" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a8fbb13a-4ff4-42ba-969a-fa3f6cbdc6d9" />

---
title: Query Parallelization
sidebar_label: Parallelization
---

Deephaven automatically parallelizes queries, using multiple CPU cores to dramatically improve performance. Understanding how parallelization works helps you write efficient, high-performance queries.

When you run a query on a multi-core system, Deephaven splits the work across available CPU cores and processes data chunks simultaneously. A query that takes 10 seconds on a single core might complete in 2-3 seconds when parallelized across 4 cores.

This guide shows you how to write queries that leverage parallelization effectively.

## How Deephaven parallelizes queries

Deephaven parallelizes at two levels: across multiple table operations and within individual operations.

> ### Multiple operations run simultaneously

Reviewer: This heading falls into the imprecision of the earlier comment.  You really want to say that multiple tables are computed simultaneously.  "operations" is probably too imprecise as a word.  (it is also used below).

When you have independent operations, Deephaven processes them in parallel. Consider this query that performs three independent calculations:

```python test-set=parallel order=trades,high_value,by_symbol,recent
from deephaven import time_table, agg

# Create a ticking data source
trades = time_table("PT1s").update(
    [
        "Symbol = `SYM` + (int)(i % 5)",
        "Price = 100 + randomGaussian(0, 10)",
        "Volume = randomInt(100, 10000)",
    ]
)

# These three operations run simultaneously
high_value = trades.where("Price * Volume > 500000")
by_symbol = trades.agg_by([agg.sum_("TotalVolume = Volume")], "Symbol")
recent = trades.tail(100)
```

When new data arrives, Deephaven processes all three operations at the same time on different CPU cores. The operations are independent, so they don't need to wait for each other.

### Individual operations split work across cores

> Within a single operation, Deephaven splits the data into chunks and processes them in parallel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within a single table, Deephaven splits the data into chunks and processes the chunks in parallel:
```

source = empty_table(100).update(
    [
        "FirstName = `User` + i",
        "LastName = `Name` + (i % 10)",
        "FullName = FirstName + ' ' + LastName",
    ]
)
```

**Conditional logic** with [`update`](../../reference/table-operations/select/update.md):

```python test-set=safe order=source
from deephaven import empty_table

source = empty_table(100).update(
    [
        "Value = i * 3.14",
        "Category = Value > 100 ? `High` : `Low`",
        "Tier = Value > 200 ? 1 : (Value > 100 ? 2 : 3)",
    ]
)
```

**Built-in functions**:

```python test-set=safe order=source,result
from deephaven import empty_table

source = empty_table(100).update("Timestamp = '2024-01-01T00:00:00 ET' + 'PT1m' * i")

result = source.update(
    [
        "Hour = hourOfDay(Timestamp, 'ET', false)",
        "Day = dayOfMonth(Timestamp, 'ET')",
        "NextDay = Timestamp + 'P1D'",
    ]
)
```

These operations are thread-safe because:

- They only use values from the current row.
- They don't modify shared state.
- They don't depend on processing order.
- They produce the same result regardless of which core processes them.

### Operations requiring serial execution

> Some operations need rows to be processed in a specific order or access shared state. These require [`.with_serial()`](../../conceptual/query-engine/parallelization.md#using-with_serial-for-selectables) to force sequential, single-threaded execution:

Reviewer: This section is harder to follow than it should be.  It is mangling two learning concepts together and is getting muddy because of it.

* Concept 1: What are thread unsafe queries?  This concept is not clearly laid out with examples and discussion.
* Concept 2: How do you modify a thread unsafe query to make it give correct answers? (e.g.`.with_serial`).

I think that if these two topics are split out, it will impact the outline and how the ideas after this are presented.

```python test-set=serial order=result
from deephaven import empty_table
from deephaven.table import Selectable

# This counter needs sequential processing
counter = 0

def get_next_id():
    global counter
    counter += 1
    return counter

# Use .with_serial() for ordered execution
col = Selectable.parse("ID = get_next_id()").with_serial()
result = empty_table(100).update(col)
```

Without [`.with_serial()`](../../conceptual/query-engine/parallelization.md#using-with_serial-for-selectables), multiple cores might read and update `counter` simultaneously, producing incorrect results.

**When to use `.with_serial()`**:

- Sequential numbering or counters.
- Operations that depend on row order.
- Accessing non-thread-safe external resources.
- File I/O or logging operations.

**Performance trade-off**: Serial execution is slower because it uses only one core, but correctness comes first. Use serial execution when needed for correctness, and parallelization everywhere else for speed.

## Performance tips

> ### Prefer stateless operations

Reviewer: `stateless` and `threadsafe` are used interchangeably in this doc.  They aren't the same, and we haven't defined the terms for people that are new to these concepts.  That makes a lot of stuff here hard to understand and follow.  I'm having to pause any time I see either term to think about it.

Along these lines, is it the statefulnes / statelessness that is resulting in the performance difference, or is it the parallel / serialness?  I would argue that it is the parallel / serialness that is dictating the performance difference, but to get correct code, sometimes serialness is needed.

# ✓ Built-in aggregation - highly optimized
result = source.agg_by([agg.sum_("Total = Value")], "Symbol")

# ✗ Custom aggregation - harder to parallelize efficiently
```

### Choose the right table operation

Different operations have different performance characteristics:

- [`update`](../../reference/table-operations/select/update.md): Creates in-memory columns, best for frequently accessed data.
- [`update_view`](../../reference/table-operations/select/update-view.md): Computes on demand, best for large tables where only subsets are accessed.
- [`lazy_update`](../../reference/table-operations/select/lazy-update.md): Memoizes calculations, best when many rows share the same input values.

```python test-set=perf order=source,result1,result2,result3
from deephaven import empty_table

source = empty_table(1_000_000).update("Group = i % 100")

# update: Fast access, uses more memory
result1 = source.update("Squared = Group * Group")

# update_view: Uses less memory, computes on demand
result2 = source.update_view("Squared = Group * Group")

# lazy_update: Efficient for repeated values (100 unique Groups)
result3 = source.lazy_update("Squared = Group * Group")

> ```

Reviewer: This misses on multiple levels.
1. This whole section discusses tradeoffs of different table operations.  As presented, it is irrelevant to this topic.
2. The key topic that should be covered somewhere is that only certain table operations support serial and barrier controls.  Where this should go, I'm not sure.  I'm not sure if it should or should not be included in this document.

The real message is that not all table operations support serial and barrier controls, and there are performance implications.  For example, if you must use `update`, that means that you have an in-memory column instead of (potentially) a formula column.  I don't know if we need a section to smack the user in the face with this idea or not.

> ### Leverage the Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)

Reviewer: This is insider lingo and not user lingo.  The insider lingo is not explained below.  Maybe just use user lingo so that it doesn't need to be explained.
